.. _efr32BG27_brd2602:

SiLabs EFR32BG27-BRD2602(A) (EFR32BG27 +8 dBm Dev Kit Board)
############################################################

BRD2602 is a board based on EFR32BG27 SoC and is one of
:ref:`efr32_thunderboard`.

Hardware
********

- EFR32BG27 Blue Gecko Wireless SoC with up to 76.8 MHz operating frequency
- ARM® Cortex® M33 core with 64 kB RAM and 768 kB Flash
- Macronix ultra low power 8-Mbit SPI flash (MX25R8035F)
- 2.4 GHz ceramic antenna for wireless transmission
- Silicon Labs Si7021 relative humidity and temperature sensor
- Vishay VEML6035 low power, high sensitivity ambient light Sensor
- Silicon Labs Si7210 hall effect sensor
- TDK InvenSense ICM-20689 6-axis inertial sensor
- Pair of PDM microphones
- One LED and one push button
- Power enable signals and isolation switches for ultra low power operation
- On-board SEGGER J-Link debugger for easy programming and debugging, which
  includes a USB virtual COM port and Packet Trace Interface (PTI)
- Mini Simplicity connector for access to energy profiling and advanced wireless
  network debugging
- Breakout pads for GPIO access and connection to external hardware
- Reset button
- CR2032 coin cell holder and external battery connector

Supported Features
==================

The efr32bg27_brd2602 board configuration supports the following hardware features:

+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| Interface | Controller | Driver/Component                    |
+===========+============+=====================================+
| NVIC      | on-chip    | nested vector interrupt controller  |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| SYSTICK   | on-chip    | systick                             |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| FLASH     | on-chip    | flash memory                        |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| GPIO      | on-chip    | gpio                                |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+
| UART      | on-chip    | serial                              |
+-----------+------------+-------------------------------------+

Programming and Debugging
=========================

The sample application :ref:`hello_world` is used for this example.
Build the Zephyr kernel and application:

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: efr32bg_brd4184a
   :goals: build

Connect your device to your host computer using the USB port and you
should see a USB connection. Use `west`'s flash command

Unlike older Silicon Labs devices, this device can't be flashed using regular
SEGGER J-Link software at the moment. Instead
`Silicon Labs' Simplicity Commander`_ is required in order to upload any
software to this device.

Open Simplicity Commander and go to "Flash" tab. Enter the path to `zephyr.hex` or
`zephyr.bin` file in text field labeled "Binary file". Click "Flash" to upload the
software to your device.

.. note::
   If you get an "unspecified error during flashing", you may need to use the
   memory erase option first.

Open a serial terminal (minicom, putty, etc.) with the following settings:

- Speed: 115200
- Data: 8 bits
- Parity: None
- Stop bits: 1

Reset the board and you should be able to see on the corresponding Serial Port
the following message:

.. code-block:: console

   Hello World! efr32bg27_brd2602a

.. _Silicon Labs' Simplicity Commander:
   https://www.silabs.com/developers/mcu-programming-options
