.. zephyr:board:: mgm260p_ek2713a

Overview
********

The `MGM260P Explorer Kit`_ is a small form factor development and evaluation platform based on the
`MGM260P Module`_. The Explorer Kit is focused on rapid prototyping and concept creation of IoT
applications for 2.4 GHz wireless protocols including Bluetooth LE, Bluetooth mesh, Zigbee, Thread,
and Matter.

.. _MGM260P Explorer Kit:
   https://www.silabs.com/development-tools/wireless/xgm260p-explorer-kit

.. _MGM260P Module:
   https://www.silabs.com/wireless/zigbee/efr32mg26-series-2-modules

Hardware
********

- MGM260PD32VNA Module
- CPU core: ARM Cortex®-M33 with FPU
- Flash memory: 3200 kB
- RAM: 512 kB
- Transmit power: up to +20 dBm
- Operation frequency: 2.4 GHz
- Crystals for LFXO (32.768 kHz) on the board and HFXO (40 MHz) in the module.

For more information about the MGM260P module and Explorer Kit, refer to these documents:

- `MGM260P Datasheet`_
- `EFR32xG26 Reference Manual`_
- `MGM260P-EK2713A User Guide`_

.. _MGM260P Datasheet:
   https://www.silabs.com/documents/public/data-sheets/mgm260p-datasheet.pdf

.. _EFR32xG26 Reference Manual:
   https://www.silabs.com/documents/public/reference-manuals/efr32xg26-rm.pdf

.. _MGM260P-EK2713A User Guide:
   https://www.silabs.com/documents/public/user-guides/ug613-xgm260-ek2713a-user-guide.pdf

Supported Features
==================

.. zephyr:board-supported-hw::

System Clock
============

The MGM260P Module is configured to use the HFRCODPLL oscillator at 80 MHz as the system clock,
locked to the 40 MHz crystal oscillator.

Serial Port
===========

The MGM260P Module has 3 USARTs and 4 EUSARTs.
USART0 is connected to the board controller and is used for the console.

Programming and Debugging
*************************

.. zephyr:board-supported-runners::

Flashing
========

Connect the Explorer Kit to your host computer using the USB port.

Here is an example for the :zephyr:code-sample:`hello_world` application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: mgm260p_ek2713a
   :goals: flash

Open a serial terminal (minicom, putty, etc.) with the following settings:

- Speed: 115200
- Data: 8 bits
- Parity: None
- Stop bits: 1

Reset the board and you should see the following message in the terminal:

.. code-block:: console

   Hello World! mgm260p_ek2713a

Bluetooth
=========

To use Bluetooth functionality, run the command below to retrieve necessary binary
blobs from the Silicon Labs HAL repository.

.. code-block:: console

   west blobs fetch hal_silabs

Then build the Zephyr kernel and a Bluetooth sample with the following
command. The :zephyr:code-sample:`bluetooth_observer` sample application is used in
this example.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/bluetooth/observer
   :board: mgm260p_ek2713a
   :goals: build
