.. _vulnerabilities_2025:

CVE-2025
########

:cve:`2025-1673`
----------------

Out of bounds read when calling crc16_ansi and strlen in dns_validate_msg

A malicious or malformed DNS packet without a payload can cause an out-of-bounds
read, resulting in a crash (denial of service) or an incorrect computation.

- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-jjhx-rrh4-j8mx
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-jjhx-rrh4-j8mx>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.1.0

- `PR 82072 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/82072>`_

- `PR 82289 fix for 4.0
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/82289>`_

- `PR 82288 fix for 3.7
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/82288>`_

:cve:`2025-1674`
----------------

Out of bounds read when unpacking DNS answers

A lack of input validation allows for out of bounds reads caused by malicious or
malformed packets.

- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-x975-8pgf-qh66
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-x975-8pgf-qh66>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.1.0

- `PR 82072 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/82072>`_

- `PR 82289 fix for 4.0
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/82289>`_

- `PR 82288 fix for 3.7
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/82288>`_

:cve:`2025-1675`
----------------

Out of bounds read in dns_copy_qname

The function dns_copy_qname in dns_pack.c performs performs a memcpy operation
with an untrusted field and does not check if the source buffer is large enough
to contain the copied data.

- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-2m84-5hfw-m8v4
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-2m84-5hfw-m8v4>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.1.0

- `PR 82072 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/82072>`_

- `PR 82289 fix for 4.0
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/82289>`_

- `PR 82288 fix for 3.7
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/82288>`_

:cve:`2025-2962`
----------------

Infinite loop in dns_copy_qname

A denial-of-service issue in the dns implementation could cause an
infinite loop.

- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-2qp5-c2vq-g2ww
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-2qp5-c2vq-g2ww>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.2.0

- `PR 87753 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/87753>`_

- `PR 87925 fix for 4.1
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/87925>`_

- `PR 87949 fix for 3.7
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/87949>`_

:cve:`2025-7403`
----------------

Bluetooth: bt_conn_tx_processor unsafe handling

Unsafe handling in bt_conn_tx_processor causes a use-after-free,
resulting in a write-before-zero. The written 4 bytes are
attacker-controlled, enabling precise memory corruption.

- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-9r46-cqqw-6j2j
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-9r46-cqqw-6j2j>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.2.0

- `PR 90975 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/90975>`_

:cve:`2025-10456`
-----------------

Bluetooth: Semi-Arbitrary ability to make the BLE Target send
disconnection requests

A vulnerability was identified in the handling of Bluetooth Low Energy
(BLE) fixed channels (such as SMP or ATT). Specifically, an attacker
could exploit a flaw that causes the BLE target (i.e., the device
under attack) to attempt to disconnect a fixed channel, which is not
allowed per the Bluetooth specification. This leads to undefined
behavior, including potential assertion failures, crashes, or memory
corruption.

- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-hcc8-3qr7-c9m8
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-hcc8-3qr7-c9m8>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.2.0

- `PR 93576 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/93576>`_

- `PR 100474 fix for 3.7
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/100474>`_

:cve:`2025-10457`
-----------------

Bluetooth: Out-Of-Context le_conn_rsp handling

The function responsible for handling BLE connection responses does
not verify whether a response is expected—that is, whether the device
has initiated a connection request. Instead, it relies solely on
identifier matching.

- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-xqj6-vh76-2vv8
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-xqj6-vh76-2vv8>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.2.0

- `PR 94080 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/94080>`_

:cve:`2025-10458`
-----------------

Bluetooth: le_conn_rsp does not sanitize CID, MTU, MPS values

Parameters are not validated or sanitized, and are later used in
various internal operations.

- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-vmww-237q-2fwp
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-vmww-237q-2fwp>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.2.0

- `PR 93174 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/93174>`_

:cve:`2025-9408`
----------------

Userspace privilege escalation vulnerability on Cortex M

System call entry on Cortex M (and possibly R and A, but I think not) has a race which allows very
practical privilege escalation for malicious userspace processes.


- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-3r6j-5mp3-75wr
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-3r6j-5mp3-75wr>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.3.0

- `PR 95101 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/95101>`_
- `PR 96850 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/96850>`_

- `PR 96014 fix for 4.2
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/96014>`_
- `PR 97306 fix for 4.2
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/97306>`_

- `PR 96015 fix for 4.1
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/96015>`_
- `PR 97305 fix for 4.1
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/97305>`_

- `PR 96030 fix for 3.7
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/96030>`_
- `PR 97313 fix for 3.7
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/97313>`_

:cve:`2025-9557`
----------------

Bluetooth: Mesh: Out-of-Bound Write in gen_prov_cont

An out-of-bound write can lead to an arbitrary code execution. Even on
devices with some form of memory protection, this can still lead to a
crash and a resultant denial of service.

- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-r3j3-c5v7-2ppf
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-r3j3-c5v7-2ppf>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.3.0

- `PR 95061 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/95061>`_

- `PR 97518 fix for 4.2
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/97518>`_

- `PR 97517 fix for 4.1
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/97517>`_

:cve:`2025-9558`
----------------

Bluetooth: Mesh: Out-of-Bound Write in gen_prov_start

There is a potential OOB Write vulnerability in the gen_prov_start
function in pb_adv.c. The full length of the received data is copied
into the link.rx.buf receiver buffer without any validation on the
data size.

- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-8wvr-688x-68vr
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-8wvr-688x-68vr>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.3.0

- `PR 95064 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/95064>`_

- `PR 97520 fix for 4.2
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/97520>`_

- `PR 97519 fix for 4.1
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/97519>`_


:cve:`2025-12035`
-----------------

Bluetooth: Integer Overflow in Bluetooth Classic (BR/EDR) L2CAP

An integer overflow condition exists in Bluetooth Host stack, within the bt_br_acl_recv routine a
critical path for processing inbound BR/EDR L2CAP traffic.


- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-p793-3456-h7w3
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-p793-3456-h7w3>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.3.0

- `PR 97370 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/97370>`_


:cve:`2025-12890`
-----------------

Bluetooth: peripheral: Invalid handling of malformed connection request

Improper handling of malformed Connection Request with the interval
set to be 1 (which supposed to be illegal) and the chM 0x7CFFFFFFFF
triggers a crash. The peripheral will not be connectable after it.

- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-8hrf-pfww-83v9
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-8hrf-pfww-83v9>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.2.0

- `PR 89955 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/89955>`_

:cve:`2025-12899`
-----------------

net: icmp: Out of bound memory read

A flaw in Zephyr’s network stack allows an IPv4 packet containing ICMP type 128 to be misclassified
as an ICMPv6 Echo Request. This results in an out-of-bounds memory read and creates a potential
information-leak vulnerability in the networking subsystem.


- `Zephyr project bug tracker GHSA-c2vg-hj83-c2vg
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/security/advisories/GHSA-c2vg-hj83-c2vg>`_

This has been fixed in main for v4.3.0

- `PR 98780 fix for main
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/98780>`_

- `PR 98983 fix for 4.2
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/98983>`_

- `PR 98984 fix for 4.1
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/98984>`_

- `PR 98985 fix for 3.7
  <https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/98985>`_
