.. zephyr:board:: xg28_ek2705a

Overview
********

The `EFR32xG28 Explorer Kit`_ is a small form factor development and evaluation platform based on
the `EFR32xG28 System-on-Chip`_. The EFR32xG28 Explorer Kit is focused on rapid prototyping and
concept creation of IoT applications for Sub-GHz and Bluetooth LE like Wi-SUN, Amazon Sidewalk,
Z-Wave, Wireless M-Bus, and proprietary networks.

.. _EFR32xG28 Explorer Kit:
   https://www.silabs.com/development-tools/wireless/efr32xg28-explorer-kit

.. _EFR32xG28 System-on-Chip:
   https://www.silabs.com/wireless/z-wave/efr32zg28-z-wave-800-socs

Hardware
********

- EFR32ZG28B312F1024IM48 SoC
- CPU core: ARM Cortex®-M33 with FPU
- Flash memory: 1024 kB
- RAM: 256 kB
- Transmit power: up to +10 dBm (2.4 GHz) and +14 dBm (sub-GHz)
- Operation frequency: 2.4 GHz and sub-GHz
- Crystals for HFXO (39 MHz) and LFXO (32.768 kHz) on the board

For more information about the xG28 SoC and Explorer Kit, refer to these documents:

- `EFR32xG28 Datasheet`_
- `EFR32xG28 Reference Manual`_
- `xG28-EK2705A User Guide`_

.. _EFR32xG28 Datasheet:
   https://www.silabs.com/documents/public/data-sheets/efr32zg28-datasheet.pdf

.. _EFR32xG28 Reference Manual:
   https://www.silabs.com/documents/public/reference-manuals/efr32xg28-rm.pdf

.. _xG28-EK2705A User Guide:
   https://www.silabs.com/documents/public/user-guides/ug559-xg28-ek2705a.pdf

Supported Features
==================

.. zephyr:board-supported-hw::

System Clock
============

The xG28 SoC is configured to use the HFRCODPLL oscillator at 78 MHz as the system clock,
locked to the 39 MHz crystal oscillator.

Serial Port
===========

The xG28 SoC has 1 USART and 3 EUSARTs.
USART0 is connected to the board controller and is used for the console.

Programming and Debugging
*************************

.. zephyr:board-supported-runners::

Flashing
========

Connect the Explorer Kit to your host computer using the USB port.

Here is an example for the :zephyr:code-sample:`hello_world` application.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/hello_world
   :board: xg28_ek2705a
   :goals: flash

Open a serial terminal (minicom, putty, etc.) with the following settings:

- Speed: 115200
- Data: 8 bits
- Parity: None
- Stop bits: 1

Reset the board and you should see the following message in the terminal:

.. code-block:: console

   Hello World! xg28_ek2705a

Bluetooth
=========

To use Bluetooth functionality as well as other wireless functionality, run the command
below to retrieve necessary binary blobs from the Silicon Labs HAL repository.

.. code-block:: console

   west blobs fetch hal_silabs

Then build the Zephyr kernel and a Bluetooth sample with the following
command. The :zephyr:code-sample:`bluetooth_observer` sample application is used in
this example.

.. zephyr-app-commands::
   :zephyr-app: samples/bluetooth/observer
   :board: xg28_ek2705a
   :goals: build
